# Prompt Engineering

**Prompt:** Input provided to the LLM.

**Prompt Engineering:** The process of designing prompts to generate specific output.


## Prompt Template

1. Instructions (system message)
2. Context or additional info
3. Input (user message)
4. Output indicator

## Prompt Guidelines

1. Include details in the prompt.
2. Ask the model to adopt a persona (Act as).
3. Use delimiters to clearly indicate the parts of the prompt.
   - Delimiters can be ` ```, """, <>, <tag></tag>, : `  
4. Specify the steps required to complete the task (chain of thought).
5. Few Shot Prompting (providing examples).
6. Specify the desired length and structure of output.
7. Reference text.
8. Iterate.

**Parameters:**

1. n: Number of choices.
2. max_tokens.
3. stop.
4. response_format.
5. temperature.
6. top_p.


## Hallucinations

- LLM generating factually incorrect or nonsensical information.
- Misalignment of text generation objectives and user's desired responses.

**Sources of Hallucinations:**

1. Imperfect representation learning.
2. Erroneous decoding.
3. Exposure bias.
4. Parametric knowledge bias.

**NLP Hallucination Types:**

- *Intrinsic:* Input info is manipulated.
- *Extrinsic:* Info is not added in input.

**LLM Hallucinations Types:**

1. Factuality Hallucination
   - Factual Inconsistency
   - Factual Fabrication 
2. Faithfulness Hallucination
   - Instruction Inconsistency
   - Context Inconsistency
   - Logical Inconsistency

## Tasks

1. Contradictory sentiment analysis.
2. Prompt to categorize the text to Sales, Service, and General.
3. Mathematical solution for the question: "Two men took 5 days to complete the task of painting a wall. Three women took 2 days to paint the same wall. How many days would 2 men and 2 women take to paint the wall?"
4. An AI sales bot that sells dog houses. Provide some context about your product.
