# RDBMS
Relational Database Management System is a set of software and capabilities that enable IT teams to create, update, administer and interact with a relational database.

```
Relational database is organization of data in tables or relations of colomns & rows. Makes it easy to understand how data items are relates to each other.
```

*Why RDBMS?*

- Structured data model
- Large scale concurrent data access
- Fault tolerance
- Distributed data storage
- Enforced data integrity
- Support for multiple client types

*RDBMS Componenets:*

- Client:	Provides users the ability to connect to database servers and execute commands.
- Connection Handler:	Receives incoming client connections and create new thread execution contexts for isolating client connections from each other.
- Parser:	Validate and convert SQL commands to system commands.
- Query: Cache	Store query results for later retrival when the same commands are executed.
- Optimizer:	Apply available engine optimizations to execute queries in the most optimal way to reduce query execution time and ensure properly execution order.
- Storage Engine:	Stores data on hard drives for persistent access.


*Data Structure*

- RDBMS uses tabular data struct to store data and deliver relations
- Table comprise of rows and coulumns
- Also there are constraints. A constraint is some sorta restriction on the type or value that can be assigned to a column.

# SQL
Acronym for structured query language.  SQL is used to...

- Define database structure : **DDL** [Data Defining Lang]
```
CREATE
ALTER
DROP
TRUNCATE
RENAME
```
- Manipulate stored data : **DML** [Data Manipulation Language.]
```
INSERT
UPDATE
DELETE
```
- Define data access permissions: **DCL** [Data Control Language.]
```
GRANT
REVOKE
```
- Control concurrent data access: **TCL** [Transaction Control Language. ]
```
COMMIT
ROLLBACK
SAVEPOINT
```
- Query stored data: **DQL** [Data Query Language.]
```
SELECT
WHERE
ORDER BY
GROUP BY
HAVING
```

## Functions in SQL

### Aggregate Functions:

Perform a calculation on a set of values and return a single value. Examples include SUM(), AVG(), COUNT(), MIN(), and MAX().

```
SELECT AVG(salary) FROM employees;
```

### Scalar Functions:

Operate on a single value and return a modified or calculated value. Examples include UPPER(), LOWER(), LEN(), CONCAT(), and ROUND().

```
SELECT UPPER(employee_name) FROM employees;
```

### Date and Time Functions:

Manipulate date and time values. Examples include NOW(), DATE(), MONTH(), YEAR(), and DATEDIFF().

```
SELECT NOW() FROM orders;
```

### String Functions:

Manipulate string values. Examples include CONCAT(), SUBSTRING(), LENGTH(), and TRIM().

```
SELECT CONCAT(first_name, ' ', last_name) AS full_name FROM customers;
```

### Mathematical Functions:

Perform mathematical operations. Examples include ROUND(), ABS(), CEIL(), and FLOOR().

```
SELECT ROUND(price, 2) FROM products;
```

### Conditional Functions:

Perform operations based on conditions. Examples include CASE, IF(), and COALESCE().

```
SELECT
    CASE
        WHEN age < 18 THEN 'Minor'
        ELSE 'Adult'
    END AS age_group
FROM persons;
```

## Data Types in SQL

### Character : Fixed Length / Variable Length

- Fixed Length

```
-- data to take "y" or "n"

have_pet character(1);
```

- Variable Length

```
-- could be declared via character varying(n) or varchar(n)

pet_name varchar(20);

```
### Numeric : Decimal / Intiger / Floating Point

Types: 
- bit(n)
- bit varying(n)
- integer
- smallint
- bigint
- real(s)
- float(p,s)
- double precision(p,s)
- decimal(p,s)


```
annual_income decimal(10,2);

age int;

avg_temp float(10);
```

### Temporal : Date / Time / Time Stamp

```
dob date;  stores in YYYY-MM-DD format.

received_at time; stores in HH:MM:SS fromat.

created_at timestamp; stores in YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS format.
```

## What is a database

A database is a system of software and capabilites that make validating, storing, searching, filtering, aggregating, grouping, and administering data possible. 

### SQL DB

Data in a SQL database are started in objects called tables. Tables provide the relational information for the data stored in the database.

### NoSQL DB

NoSQL databases typically use some other means or DSL for administering data and use different structures for storing data and relational information.

## Database Schema

SCHEMAS are like folders within a database, and are mainly used to group logical objects together, which leads to ease of setting permissions by schema.

Schema gives shape to the data stored in the database.

A schema defines the organization of data and the relationships between different tables within a database.

A schema can be referred to as a collection of tables. You can think of a schema as a container that holds and organizes a collection of tables in a database.

Schema defines the number of table objects, data types they will hold in different colomns and their relationships, this is referred as integrity constraint.

It includes:
- Column names
- Data types
- Data constraints
- Relationships

```
create schema <schema_name>;

create table <table_name> (
    <col_name> datatype constraint1 constraint2 ...,
    ...
);

-- A full schema is created using multiple create statements that define each table and those table relationships.
```

## Data Constraints

A column can a combination of these constraints.

- Not Null :	Ensures that a column's value is not null.
- Unique :	Ensures that a column's value is unique in the table.
- Primary Key :	Combines unique and not null. Uniquely identifies each row.
- Foreign Key :	Links to a row in another table. Prevents the destruction of those links.
- Default :	Specifies a value for a column, if one is not given.
- Check :	Ensures the value of a column satisfies a specific condition.
- Create Index :	Create a sorted index of the column for faster searching.

## Subqueries

Subqueries are like questions within questions in a database. Imagine you have a big question (the outer query), and inside it, there are smaller questions (subqueries) helping to find answers. Here are three types of these smaller questions:

### Nest Query in the WHERE clause:
   - This is like asking a specific question about the data while looking at certain conditions.

### Inline View in the FROM clause:
   - It's similar to creating a temporary table to make it easier to answer the main question.

### Inner Query in the SELECT clause:
   - Think of it as creating a temporary piece of information to include in the final answer.

**Important Points to Remember:**

- Nested queries (subqueries) can give back either one answer or many.
- You can compare the results of these smaller questions using words like "AND" or "OR."
- Inline views are like making a temporary table to organize the information.
- Inner queries are like creating a temporary piece of information to show alongside the main answer.
- The temporary piece of information has a value that's the answer to the smaller question.
- Subqueries are helpful but might not be as fast as using joins for large amounts of data.


## Joins or Set Operations

They are used to combine rows from two or more tables.


**For eg.** suppose data is as emp(id, name, dept_id) and dept(id, name)

```
select emp.id, emp.name, dept.name from emp

join dept on emp.dept_id = dept.id

```

### Inner Join

Selects all rows from both tables as long as there is a match between the columns.

```
SELECT *
FROM table1
INNER JOIN table2 ON table1.column_name = table2.column_name
```
 

### Outer Join or full outer join:

When the records match for the left table or right table
```
SELECT *
FROM table1
FULL JOIN table2 ON table1.column_name = table2.column_name;
```

### Left Join

All the records from the left table (the table mentioned first in the SQL statement) are included in the result.
 
```
SELECT *
FROM left_table
LEFT JOIN right_table ON left_table.id = right_table.id;
```

### Right Join

All the records from the right table (the table mentioned second in the SQL statement) are included in the result

```
SELECT *
FROM left_table
RIGHT JOIN right_table ON left_table.id = right_table.id;
```

### Self Join

When we use primary key of data 

```
SELECT e1.employee_id, e1.employee_name, e2.supervisor_name
FROM employees e1
JOIN employees e2 ON e1.supervisor_id = e2.employee_id;
```

### Union
Making union of table removig duplicates.
```
SELECT column1, column2
FROM table1
WHERE condition

UNION

SELECT column1, column2
FROM table2
WHERE condition;
```

### Union All

Making union tables without excempting duplicates
```
SELECT column1, column2
FROM table1
WHERE condition

UNION ALL

SELECT column1, column2
FROM table2
WHERE condition;
```

## CRUD

CRUD stands for Create, Read, Update, and Delete, which are the fundamental operations you can perform on data in a database. Here are basic SQL examples for each CRUD operation:

### Create (INSERT):
To add new records to a table:

```INSERT INTO your_table (column1, column2, column3)
VALUES (value1, value2, value3);

INSERT INTO users (username, email, age)
VALUES ('JohnDoe', 'john@example.com', 25);
```

### Read (SELECT):
To retrieve data from a table:

```SELECT column1, column2, column3
FROM your_table
WHERE condition;

SELECT username, email, age
FROM users
WHERE age > 21;
```
### Update (UPDATE):
To modify existing records in a table:

```UPDATE your_table
SET column1 = new_value1, column2 = new_value2
WHERE condition;

UPDATE users
SET age = 26
WHERE username = 'JohnDoe';
```

### Delete (DELETE):
To remove records from a table:

```DELETE FROM your_table
WHERE condition;

DELETE FROM users
WHERE username = 'JohnDoe';
```


## ACID

ACID stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability, which are a set of properties that guarantee the reliability and integrity of transactions in a relational database system.

### Atomicity:

Ensures that a transaction is treated as a single, indivisible unit of work. Either all the changes made in a transaction are applied, or none of them are.
### Consistency:

Guarantees that a transaction brings the database from one valid state to another. The database must meet all integrity constraints (e.g., foreign key relationships, unique constraints) before and after the transaction.
### Isolation:

Ensures that the execution of one transaction is isolated from the execution of other transactions. Even though transactions may be executed concurrently, the end result should be the same as if they were executed in some sequential order.
### Durability:

Guarantees that once a transaction is committed, its changes are permanent and survive subsequent failures. The changes made by a committed transaction are stored in a way that can withstand crashes or power outages.

## SQL Normal Forms

### First Normal Form

Rule1: have Unique values in colomns.

### Second Normal Form

Rule1: Follows 1st normal form

Rule2: have a colomn of primary key

### Third Normal Form

Rule1: Satisfies second normal form

Rule2: Not have a transitive functional dependency

### Boyce-Codd Normal Form

Rule1: Satisfies Third normal form

Rule2: For any dependency A → B, A should be a super key, i.e, A should be a non-key attribute if B is a key attribute.